- I want to start this conversation
by stating that I have spent a significant part
of my professional career writing and consuming
SOAP services, utilizing solo platforms,
and, of course, service buses.
So my biases come from experience.
I don't want to spend too much time on SOAP,
but I do think it's important to discuss it some.
SOAP, as a communication mechanism,
between systems is not inherently bad.
Like I just mentioned, I have done a lot of valuable
work leveraging SOAP.
I also don't feel like many do,
that XML is overly verbose.
The verbosity of XML adds some validation value
that in some places is very critical.
Most of my criticisms about SOAP
come from how it was implemented.
But more on that in a moment.
SOAP's values, in my opinion, come from its strong contract.
There is no doubt in my mind that WSDL
is the single best part of SOAP.
The definition language not only provides a strong contract
that can be validated,
but it also provides an inherent documentation layer.
These benefits often get ignored when discussing SOAP.
But it really aids business processing,
especially in SOA.
My issues from SOAP come from the implementation.
The envelope, in my view, is wasted space on the wire
that could have been handled in more efficient manners.
My biggest issue with SOAP, however,
is that everything is either OK, or a 200 response,
or a Fault, which is a 500 response.
There is nothing in between.
And in the real world, flow control requires
much more granularity than working or not.
The promise of SOA, even with the deficiencies of SOAP,
was amazing, in my opinion.
Well-defined contracts of desperate systems
communicating over a common protocol.
The ability to build and deploy services
and consume systems through the simple contract was amazing.
Many of the deployment issues with monoliths
were solved with SOA and we could simply do work.
Once a service was built and deployed,
then we would wire all of the communications
through standard business processing known as BPO.
And here is where the real weakness of SOA,
in my mind, comes into play.
The promise of business users wiring services
only worked in certain situations.
And even then the work they were doing
was abstracted from the web services code.
As BPO got bigger, so did the coupling of systems.
The wiring became just as much part of the code base
as the traditional code did,
and it was mostly hidden from view of the developers.
The bloated systems became riddled with spaghetti code,
painful deployments, and fragile systems,
all of which restricted agility.
The industry noted these issues as well,
and SOA's astronomic rise in use
was only matched by its crash.
It really became easier to just manage the monolith
than to manage services and wiring in separate code bases
along with the costs associated with these systems.
It just wasn't worth it in many people's eyes.